# The Late Holocene Settlement History of the Central African Rainforest: Archaeological, Palaeoenvironmental and Linguistic Evidence for 3,000 years of Interaction between Bantu Speech Communities and their Changing Environments

**POSTER PRESENTATION**

*Dirk Seidensticker, Bernard Clist, Wannes Hubau, Hans Beeckman, Koen Bostoen*

During the past forty years, archaeology in the Central African rainforest has made a significant contribution to our understanding of the settlement history of one of Africa's major biotopes. Taking into account the massive extent of this biotope, the promising results of past research, which filled the blank spot that the rainforest presented on any archaeological distribution map of Africa until the 1970s, can only be seen as starting points. Our poster aims at reviewing our current knowledge on the settlement history of the Central African rainforest as it has been documented through surveys and excavations as well as through the late Holocene paleo-environmental record between present-day Cameroon and Angola. The earliest traces of sedentary and potentially food producing peopling, mainly identified through pottery finds, date into the first millennium BC and are commonly seen in relation to a contemporaneous crisis of the rainforest and to the expansion of Bantu languages and their speech communities. It will be assessed how and when climate-induced vegetation changes influenced the expansion of Bantu languages, village dwelling groups and important technological innovations such as pottery making, iron metallurgy and agriculture. Later anomalies in the archaeological record like a potential decline of settlement activities or even local hiatus in the late 1st millennium are not well understood yet. A general view on the effects of climate change during the last two and a half millennia on the settlement of the forest as well as where and how human adaptation on the ecosystem has taken place are still largely pending. Based on a thorough synthesis of the current state of research the poster will contextualize the available archaeological, palaeenvironmental and linguistic evidence within the general chronology of the region and confront the result with recent studies trying to understand the impact of climate-driven palaeoenvironmental change on the settlement history of the Central African rainforest (e.g. Bayon et al. 2012; Maley et al. 2012; Neumann et al. 2012a; Neumann et al. 2012b; Oslisly et al. 2013a; Oslisly et al. 2013b; Eggert 2014; Kahlheber et al. 2014; Morin-Rivat et al. 2014; Bostoen et al. 2015; Grollemund et al. 2015; Maley et al. 2017).

## References

- Bayon, G., B. Dennielou, J. Etoubleau, E. Ponzevera, S. Toucanne and S. Bermell. 2012. Intensifying Weathering and Land Use in Iron Age Central Africa. Science 335: 1219-1222.
- Bostoen, K., B. Clist, C. Doumenge, R. Grollemund, J.-M. Hombert, J. Koni Muluwa and J. Maley. 2015. Middle to Late Holocene Paleoclimatic Change and the Early Bantu Expansion in the Rain Forests of West Central-Africa. Current Anthropology 56, 3: 354-384.
- Eggert, M. 2014. The Archaeology of the Central African Rainforest: Its Current State. In C. Renfrew & P. Bahn (eds.), The Cambridge World Prehistory, 183-203. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Grollemund, R., S. Branford, K. Bostoen, A. Meade, C. Venditti and M. Pagel. 2015. Bantu Expansion Shows That Habitat Alters the Route and Pace of Human Dispersals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112, 43: 13296-13301.
- Kahlheber, S., M.K.H. Eggert, D. Seidensticker and H.-P. Wotzka. 2014. Pearl Millet and Other Plant Remains from the Early Iron Age Site of Boso-Njafo (Inner Congo Basin, Democratic Republic of the Congo). African Archaeologial Review 31, 3: 479-512.
- Maley, J., C. Doumenge, P. Giresse, G. Mahé, N. Philippon, W. Hubau, M.O. Lokonda, J.M. Tshibamba and A. Chepstow-Lusty. 2017. Late Holocene Forest Contraction and Fragmentation in Central Africa. Quaternary Research: 1-17.
- Maley, J., P. Giresse, C. Doumenge and F. Charly. 2012. Comment “on Intensifying Weathering and Land Use in Iron Age Central Africa". Science 337: 1040.
- Morin-Rivat, J., A. Fayolle, J.-F. Gillet, N. Bourland, S. Gourlet-Fleury, R. Oslisly, L. Bremond, I. Bentaleb, H. Beeckman and J.-L. Doucet. 2014. New evidence of human activities during the Holocene in the lowland forests of the northern Congo Basin. Radiocarbon 56: 209–220.
- Neumann, K., K. Bostoen, A. Höhn, S. Kahlheber, A. Ngomanda and B. Tchiengué. 2012a. First Farmers in the Central African Rainforest: A View from Southern Cameroon. Quaternary International 249, 6: 53 - 62.
- Neumann, K., M.K.H. Eggert, R. Oslisly, B. Clist, T. Denham, P. de Maret, S. Ozainne, E. Hildebrand, K. Bostoen, U. Salzmann, D. Schwartz, B. Eichhorn, B. Tchiengué and A. Höhn. 2012b. Comment on “Intensifying Weathering and Land Use in Iron Age Central Africa”. Science 337, 6098: 1040.
- Oslisly, R., I. Bentaleb, C. Favier, M. Fontugne, J.-F. Gillet and J. Morin-Rivat. 2013a. West Central African peoples: Survey of radiocarbon dates over the past 5000 years. Radiocarbon 55, 2-3: 1377-1382.
- Oslisly, R., L. White, I. Bentaleb, C. Favier, M. Fontugne, J.-F. Gillet and D. Sebag. 2013b. Climatic and cultural changes in the west Congo Basin forests over the past 5000 years. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B 368, 1625: 